Docs re🧛🏻‍♂️ (#75)
avohq/docs: pages/implementation/devs-101.mdx

---
layout: 'guide'
title: 'Avo 101 for developers'
# abstract: 'Developer's overview of Avo'
---

import Link from '../../components/Link';

> The use case of Avo for developers is twofold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The use case of Avo for developers is twofold:
```

> - Avo generated file, which is the code representation of your tracking plan, containing Avo Functions

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we can use this opportunity to frame the value props?
```suggestion
- Implementing reliable tracking fast with the type-safe Avo Functions. Avo Functions are type-safe, code generated representation of your tracking plan.
```

Author: How about:

- Avo generated file, which is the type-safe code representation of your tracking plan, containing Avo Functions, allows you to implementing reliable tracking fast.

- Avo Inspector SDKs, allow you to plug in your existing tracking to Avo to analyze it and help you migrate to type-safe implementation.

Reviewer: Shipit!

> - Avo Inspector SDKs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Understand the current state of tracking with the Avo Inspector SDKs
```

Each can be used on its own, but together they unlock the full power of Avo.

## <a name="avo-generated-file"></a> Avo generated file containing Avo Functions

This is the code representation of the tracking plan you define in Avo for a given source. You can think of a source as a platform that sends events. For example if you set up an iOS/Swift source the generated file would be a `.swift` file. Since the tracking plans are different for each customer the content of this file is also different. We generate the files and you can download them either with <Link passHref href="/implementation/cli"><a>the Avo CLI</a></Link> or in the Avo web interface in <Link passHref href="/workspace/implement"><a>the Implement tab</a></Link>.

First of all, feel free to explore your generated file. It's deliberately designed to be easily readable. Our code generation is under active development and some advanced or new features may slightly differ from one platform to another. The generated file is the best source of truth when looking for implementation details!

> You can make changes to the generated file, but remember, every time you pull the code from Фvo you would need to apply your changes separately. If you find yourself in this situation please <Link passHref href="/help/troubleshooting"><a>contact us</a></Link> and we will make our best to make the generated code support your use case.

Reviewer: `Фvo` what's happening here? 😅

Reviewer: By reading this paragraph I get the feeling of this is an expected experience for developers. Should we frame it more in the direction of a edge case, something like:
```suggestion
You should never have to make changes to the Avo generated file. If you find yourself in the situation where you have to edit the file, please <Link passHref href="/help/troubleshooting"><a>contact us</a></Link>.
```

### Avo Command Line Interface

> We created a CLI tool to interact with Avo from the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Avo CLI is the easies way to interact with Avo from your development environment.
```

Run

```sh
$ npm install -g avo
```

to install the CLI.
Then login with

```sh
$ avo login
```

And pull the Avo Generated file with the following command

```sh
$ avo pull
```

> it will guide you through initial the setup and will create a config file called `avo.json` in the directory. Next time when you pull the setup will be picked from that file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it will guide you through initial the setup and will create a config file called `avo.json` in the directory. Next time when you pull the setup will be picked from that file. 

Make sure to check the `avo.json` file in to your source control to make sure the Avo configuration is in sync across your team.
```

    strict: Bool = false, noop: Bool = false)
```

- `env` - Avo is designed to act differently based on the environment. Supported values are development, staging and production. Most important differences include sending data to different projects in your analytics (to not pollute production data with dev/testing session) and ability to crash the app in development if Avo detects an error in the analytics.
- `system properties` - this are properties designed to be sent with each event. You need to provide them during initialization. You can update their values later with the `setSystemProperties` method.

```swift
public static func setSystemProperties(
    requiredStringSystemProperty: RequiredStringSystemProperty,
    optionalStringSystemProperty: OptionalStringSystemProperty?,
    requiredIntSystemProperty: Int,
    optionalFloatSystemProperty: Double?,
    optionalListSystemProperty: [Int]?);
```

Read more about property types later in the <Link passHref href="/implementation/devs-101#avo-generated-file-func-parameters"><a>Avo Functions section.</a></Link>

- `custom destinations` - there are a few ways to manage how actual calls to analytics libraries are done.

>   One is to allow Avo to manage everything, in that case you only need to add tracking library dependency to your project. Another is to manage the calls yourself, using a Custom Destination. It's basically a callback Avo will make after an Avo function is triggered and Avo does all the validations and enrichment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  One is to allow Avo to manage everything, in that case you only need to add tracking library dependency to your project. Another is to manage the calls yourself, using a Custom Destination. It's basically a callback Avo will make after an Avo function is triggered. In that case Avo does all the validations and enrichment, but you take care of passing the data to your analytics destination.
```

  There is a third advanced mixed option, where you provide an initialized SDK to Avo, <Link passHref href="/help/troubleshooting"><a>contact us</a></Link> if you want to explore it.
- `debugger` - mobile platforms (Android, iOS, React Native) support <Link passHref href="/explore-tracking-plan/start-using-visual-debuggers"><a>the Avo Analytics Debuggers</a></Link>, provide one here if you want to connect it to Avo events. You don't need to provide the debugger on the web to use it there.

> - `strict` - if this is set to true Avo would crash your app in the development environment when it sees errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `strict` - if this is set to true Avo would crash your app in the development environment when it sees errors. Note that the Avo validation will never crash your app if env is set to Production.
```

> - `noop` - if this flag is set to true Avo won't make any network calls (no tracking) in development and staging environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `noop` - if this flag is set to true Avo won't make any network calls (no tracking) in development and staging environments. Note that the noop flag is dismissed in production.
```

> - `destination options` (not shown in the example) - some platforms, for example Javscript, allow you to provide destination options for the analytics destinations that will be passed during tracking SDK initialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `destination options` (not shown in the example) - some platforms, for example Javscript, allow you to provide destination options for the analytics destinations that will be passed during tracking SDK initialization. This allows you to pass config/options through Avo to the init functions of the underlying analytics SDKs.
```

### <a name="avo-generated-file-init-inside"></a> What's inside the initAvo method / Avo constructor?

> There are a few things happening, like setting the flags, system properties and reporting function invocation in development mode to the Avo servers, so you can check whether the function has ever been successfully invoked in development on the Avo website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few things happening, like setting the flags, system properties and reporting implementation status in development mode to the Avo servers, so you can check whether the event has ever been successfully invoked in development on the Avo website.
```

But the most important part is initialization of the analytics destinations. Depending on the setup of your tracking plan you might see something like

```swift
if __ENV__ == .prod {
    amplitudeDestination = AmplitudeDestination()
    amplitudeDestination?.make("production Amplitude key is automatically here based on the data you provided in the tracking plan"")
    mixpanelDestination = MixpanelDestination()
    mixpanelDestination?.make("production Mixpanel key is automatically here based on the data you provided in the tracking plan"")
}
if __ENV__ == .dev {
    amplitudeDestination = AmplitudeDestination()
    amplitudeDestination?.make("development Amplitude key is automatically here based on the data you provided in the tracking plan"")
    mixpanelDestination = MixpanelDestination()
    mixpanelDestination?.make("development Mixpanel key is automatically here based on the data you provided in the tracking plan"")
}
```

> The keys are set up in the Avo web UI and automatically fetched by the codegen, so you don't need to do anything with this, just know that it is there.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The keys are set up in the Avo web UI and automatically fetched by the codegen, so you don't need to do anything here, just know that it is there. The API keys in Avo are version controlled, and synced across all your sources, this way you don't need to worry if correct API key is being used or not, Avo takes care of it for you. 
```

### Avo Functions

Avo functions are actual callable functions generated for events defined in your tracking plan.

> On some server platforms Avo functions are async, i.e. on Node.js they return a Promise and on C# you can await on the Avo Functions

> For example if you have an event defined with name `Track Event with String Parameters` connected to your source, the Avo functions interface will look like

Reviewer: Should we use more relateable name here? This might be a bit too meta for some people 😅 
```suggestion
For example if you have an event defined with name `App Opened` connected to your source, the Avo functions interface will look like
```

```swift

> /**
>     Track Event with String Parameters: Here goes the description from the Avo tracking plan
> 
>     - SeeAlso: [Track Event with String Parameter](https://www.avo.app/link-to-the-event-in-your-tracking-plan)
> */
> public func trackEventWithStringParameters(
>     requiredStringEventProperty: RequiredStringEventProperty,
>     optionalStringEventProperty: String?) {...}
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/**
    App Opened: This event is sent immediately after the user opens the app [This description is defined in the Tracking Plan on avo.app]
    
    - SeeAlso: [App Opened](https://www.avo.app/link-to-the-event-in-your-tracking-plan)
*/
public func appOpened(
    beverage: Beverage,
    userId: String?) {...}
```
```

#### <a name="avo-generated-file-func-parameters"></a> Property types

At this point you would notice that the parameters can have various types.

There are a few dimensions in which the parameters can differ:

##### Type

Avo supports the following types: `string`, `int`, `float`, `bool` and `object`.

##### Single value / list

You would be required to provide a list of things if the property is marked as a `list`.

##### Required / Optional

In Avo we made a design decision that you always need to provide a value of a property, even if it is optional to mitigate the risk of accidentally not providing the value and damaging the data. But if the property is marked as optional you would be able to provide `null` as it's value and it won't be sent to your analytics tool.

##### Value Constraints

You can notice that in the example above the first argument is not a `String`, but some other type. It happens because there is a constraint specified in the tracking plan that limits the possible values of this parameter. Avo has generated an enum for you:

> ```Swift
> public enum RequiredStringEventProperty : String {
>     case beer = "beer"
>     case wine = "wine"
>     case cocktail = "cocktail"
>     case water = "water"
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```Swift
public enum Beverage : String {
    case beer = "beer"
    case wine = "wine"
    case cocktail = "cocktail"
    case water = "water"
}
```
```

#### What's happening inside the Avo Functions

Avo makes sure that the provided properties are correct according to the tracking plan with runtime validations, development invocations are reported to Avo servers so you can check the invocation status on the Avo website.
If Avo Inspector is connected, the event shape is sent there. Read more about <Link passHref href="/implementation/devs-101#avo-inspector"><a>Avo Inspector</a></Link> and how to <Link passHref href="/implementation/start-using-inspector-with-avo-functions"><a>connect it to the Avo generated code</a></Link>.
The last step is actually sending the provided data to all the configured tracking destinations. There are different classes of events that can be tracked: identify, log event, update user properties, unidentify, log revenue, log page view, but everything is handled inside the Avo file and delivered in a correct form to your destinations. If you are using a Custom Destination the data will be provided to the callback object you supplied during initialization.
Tracking code would look similar to this:

> ```swift
> // destination Amplitude
> var amplitudeDestinationEventProperties: [String: Any] = [:]
> // amplitudeDestinationEventProperties will be populated with all the provided properies to this Avo Function and all the system properties.
> amplitudeDestination?.logEvent("Test Unidentify", amplitudeDestinationEventProperties)
> amplitudeDestination?.unidentify()
> // destination Mixpanel
> var mixpanelDestinationEventProperties: [String: Any] = [:]
> // mixpanelDestinationEventProperties will be populated with all the provided properies to this Avo Function and all the system properties.
> mixpanelDestination?.logEvent("Test Unidentify", mixpanelDestinationEventProperties)
> mixpanelDestination?.unidentify()
> // destination Custom dest
> var customDestEventProperties: [String: Any] = [:]
> // customDestEventProperties will be populated with all the provided properies to this Avo Function and all the system properties.
> customDest.logEvent(eventName: "Test Unidentify", eventProperties: customDestEventProperties)
> customDest.unidentify()
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```swift
// destination Amplitude
var amplitudeDestinationEventProperties: [String: Any] = [:]
// amplitudeDestinationEventProperties will be populated with all the provided properties to this Avo Function and all the system properties.
amplitudeDestination?.logEvent("Logged Out", amplitudeDestinationEventProperties)
amplitudeDestination?.unidentify()
// destination Mixpanel
var mixpanelDestinationEventProperties: [String: Any] = [:]
// mixpanelDestinationEventProperties will be populated with all the provided properties to this Avo Function and all the system properties.
mixpanelDestination?.logEvent("Logged Out", mixpanelDestinationEventProperties)
mixpanelDestination?.unidentify()
// destination Custom dest
var customDestEventProperties: [String: Any] = [:]
// customDestEventProperties will be populated with all the provided properies to this Avo Function and all the system properties.
customDest.logEvent(eventName: "Logged Out", eventProperties: customDestEventProperties)
customDest.unidentify()
```
```

This particular event has `log event` and `unidentify` actions. The methods called above will vary based on the actions of the given event. <Link passHref href="/workspace/tracking-plan/events#a-nameactionsa-actions"><a>Read more about actions here.</a></Link>

### Data Validations

Avo helps developers avoid mistakes when implementing analytics, it makes sure that your code does exactly what it is supposed to do based on the tracking plan defined in Avo, in two ways.
First, Avo is utilizing the type system of a programming language you work with. For example in the code snippet above the optional properties are supported on the language level in Swift, so we make the interface in a way you can't provide null values where they are not expected. We try to do as many validations as possible this way, so they are performed in the compile time.
Second, it's runtime validations. In cases when the language does not provide us with tool to check in the compile time, like in Javascript, we do runtime checks, looking like this

> ```swift

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript
```

assertString: function assertString(propertyId, propName, str) {
    if (typeof str !== 'string') {
        var message = propName +
            ' should be of type string but you provided type ' +
            typeof str +
            ' with value ' +
            JSON.stringify(str);
        return [{tag: 'expectedStringType', propertyId: propertyId, message: message, actualType: typeof str}];
    } else {
        return [];
    }
}
```

A check like this is run when the Avo function is triggered. Then the message is delivered to the logs, debugger or as a crash in the strict mode depending on your setup.

## Avo Inspector

> Avo Inspector includes an SDK that extracts tracking plan information from your tracking calls. It provides methods to get the shape of an event you are going to send to the analytics platform and then to send that shape alongside the event name for analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Avo Inspector includes an SDK that extracts tracking plan information from your existing tracking calls. It provides methods to get the shape of an event you are going to send to the analytics platform and then to send that shape alongside the event name for analysis.
```

```json
{
  "userId": 1337,
  "emailAddress": "jane.doe@avo.app",
  "productId": 45,
  "revenue": 15.99,
  "timestamp": 1579263014,
  "deviceId": "sdf-23-trr-456-0000"
}
```

The following event schema would be sent to Avo:

```json
{
  "userId": "int",
  "emailAddress": "string",
  "productId": "int",
  "revenue": "float",
  "timestamp": "int",
  "deviceId": "string"
}
```

Note:
You can extract the schema separately with extractSchema(eventParams: Map), the same method that's used by trackSchemaFromEvent(eventName: String, eventParams: Map)

Example

```Swift
func trackAppOpened(appOpenedEvent: Dictionary<String, Any>) {
    tracker.track(eventName: "App Opened", eventParams: appOpenedEvent);
    SceneDelegate.avoInspector?.trackSchema(fromEvent: "App Opened", eventParams: appOpenedEvent)
}
```

### Supported event schema types in Avo Inspector

`null`
`int`
`float`
`boolean`
`string`
combination of types, i.e. an optional integer would look like integer | null. If we've seen a mix of integers, strings and nulls it will be integer | string | null. List can be a part of combination.
parametrized list, i. e. list<integer | null>

> nested objects

Reviewer: Love this guide, awesome job! 😍
